feat(25146) Added AIP-25146 (#878)
googleapis/aip: aip/cloud/25146.md

---
id: 25146
state: draft
created: TBD
placement:
  category: gcp
---

# Generic Fields

Guidelines related to generic fields in [AIP-146](../0146.md) **should** be applied
with the following exceptions.

## Maps

> Fields of type `map` **must not** be composed of type Message. `map<primitive, primitive>`

Reviewer: Reading over google.aip.dev/146#maps again, this new AIP seems to be in direct contention with the following example given in the Core AIP:

```
In particular, a map can sometimes be suited to a situation where many objects of the same type are needed, with different behavior based on the names of their keys (for example, using keys as environment names).
```

I think that is still a valid use case. How do we accommodate that?

> is permissible, but `map<string, google.protobuf.Struct>` is not allowed.

Reviewer: What about other `map<primitive, primitive>` combos? We will certainly get that question.

Author: I think `map<string, primitive>` should be fine, but I believe in JSON the key must always be a string

Reviewer: According to the [protobuf JSON schema](https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/docs/proto3#json), "All keys are converted to strings", so it is still _technically_ valid to have other, non-string primitives used as keys. Not saying it's common or a good idea, but the DSL and encoding spec say it is allowed, so we should at least focus the guidance to clarify specifically what we are looking for and what is not allowed, because there is always one service that tests the boundaries :)

Author: If the keys end up as strings in the API then clients will only interact with them as strings, so no problems there!

I'll change it to say `map<primitive, primitive>` is fine

> is permissible, but `map<primitive, google.protobuf.Struct>` is not allowed.

Reviewer: Clarification: Is `map<primitive, Book>` allowed i.e. well-defined messages can be the value type, but "generic" messages cannot? Or is it strictly all `message` types?

Author: All message types.

When the key is dynamic we lose the clearly defined structure that is needed for declarative surfaces

Reviewer: > When the key is dynamic we lose the clearly defined structure that is needed for declarative surfaces

I don't follow.

What is not "clearly defined" about `map<string, Book>`? Clients should know exactly what the `Book` looks like.

Author: The problem is that clients often can't construct a schema with an arbitrary key that maps to a complex object.

This is a restriction in Terraform as well as KCC, the schema must be known at compile time **including** any keys except for simple string -> primitive maps

Basically you have to give Terraform the full schema of an object you want to represent where every settable field must have a name known at compile time. Dynamic keys where the value is an object cannot be modeled without changes.

Reviewer: Ok, I see, there is a pretty strict technological limitation here beyond our own tooling's control. Let me do a quick check on how broadly this effects existing APIs.

Reviewer: Ok so, there are over 200 fields that would violate this AIP in `google/cloud` alone. Of those, 45 of them belong to messages that define a resource. The specific fields are logged in text files attached to this comment. These were generated using a little tool I just wrote, code is here: https://github.com/noahdietz/messagemaps.

How are those fields being handled today, if at all?

[resources_only.txt](https://github.com/aip-dev/google.aip.dev/files/10025841/resources_only.txt)
[all.txt](https://github.com/aip-dev/google.aip.dev/files/10025842/all.txt)

Author: Often we don't support these resources. If we need to we have to get creative with how we support it.

For example, GKEHub Feature has a MembershipFeatureSpec. We model this as a new resource: https://registry.terraform.io/providers/hashicorp/google/latest/docs/resources/gke_hub_feature_membership where the `membership` field in the gke_hub_feature_membership resource is the key in the map

Another example is InstanceGroupManager's perInstanceConfig field: https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/reference/rest/v1/instanceGroupManagers/patchPerInstanceConfigs where the disks field is 

`Preserved disks defined for this instance. This map is keyed with the device names of the disks.`

We model this in Terraform as https://registry.terraform.io/providers/hashicorp/google/latest/docs/resources/compute_per_instance_config where the device name of the disk is a normal field in an object, and we translate that to the required format when sending the patch request

Reviewer: Given the prevalence of such fields and the existing guidance that supports use of `map<string, Message>` in my other comment, I think we need to take a long look at the technical solutions for what are technical problems. The AIPs should not aim to solve one technology's (potentially fixable) shortcomings that in turn limits valid API design patterns. As such, I'd like to see a design to fix the issues mentioned that has been rejected before moving forward with this suggested guidance.

> Ok, I see, there is a pretty strict technological limitation here beyond our own tooling's control

I said this earlier. I realize that this may necessitate contributions to the core technology that aren't solely owned by Google. Presumably, the technologies afflicted by the presented friction would appreciate expanding support for more API surfaces.

FYI @shwoodard and @toumorokoshi

Reviewer 2: sorry just catching up, and skimmed a first pass.

My high-level perspective is that we should push toward patterns that help enable both API usability which should, in turn, enable client surface usability. At minimum it should be beneficial for clients, neutral for APIs.

At first glance not allowing map<string, Message> doesn't match that criteria, IMO: I worry it will force users to effectively normalize the resource schema into some primitive (likely a string), when it is possible to have a more structured schema.

Also most clients support some form of nested message schema: this isn't a general client surface usability improvement, this would be quite specific for Terraform.

If a client surface is deficient in expressing API behavior, we should explore both if the API could be improved, and also if the client surface can have some pattern to work around said defiiciency.

I'll try to read a bit more deeply and leave some other thoughts too.

---
id: 25146
state: draft
created: TBD
placement:
  category: gcp
---

# Generic Fields

Guidelines related to generic fields in [AIP-146](../0146.md) **should** be applied
with the following exceptions.

## Maps

> Maps with nested object types **must** not exist.

Reviewer 3: I think the it's supposed to be `**must not**`, so the "not" ends up in the `<strong></strong>`.

> Maps with nested object types **must** not exist.

Reviewer 3: I think this is too vague. Maybe it should be something like,

> Fields of type, `map` *must* be composed of primitive types only, e.g. `map<string, string>` is permissible, but map<string, google.protobuf.Struct>` is not allowed.

The rationale is:

> - Declarative tools cannot represent schemas for maps with complex value types.

Reviewer 3: I don't see "rationale" in other AIPs. Omit?

> ### Alternative

Reviewer 3: Rather than having a subsection, "Alternative", since I don't see this done anywhere else, maybe Just move the sentence below up and start the sentence, "Alternatively, ...".

> APIs considering a map should prefer lists with UNORDERED_LIST behavior where the

Reviewer 3: Use backticks for "UNORDERED_LIST" and maybe we should link to the field_behavior AIP so that people know what you mean by "behavior"?

---
id: 25146
state: draft
created: TBD
placement:
  category: gcp
---

# Generic Fields

Guidelines related to generic fields in [AIP-146](../0146.md) **should** be applied
with the following exceptions.

## Maps

The value type of a map **must not** be of type Message

The rationale is:
- Cloud APIs are generally used through JSON. In JSON keys are generally field names
rather than arbitrary strings or references to other resources. Many tools that interact
with the JSON API will not be able to handle dynamic keys with static Message values.

### Alternative

> Consider using a separate resource rather than a map of objects.

Reviewer: "resource" is an overloaded term and one that carries a lot of weight in the AIPs, let's use the specific protobuf terms. Same thing for "object", its generic/overloaded.

```suggestion
Consider defining a separate message type rather than a map of messages.
```

> **or**

Reviewer: I'm not a fan of this dramatic line break and solo "**or**" - can we either combine these into a few sentences or make a (unbounded*) bulleted list?

*unbounded: meaning "here are some suggested alternatives, but there may be others"

> Prefer lists with `UNORDERED_LIST` behavior where the key of the map is moved to a

Reviewer: Refer to the AIP for this go/aip/203#unordered-list

Author: Instead of saying `UNORDERED_LIST` or in addition to?

Reviewer: In addition to.
